Docs: update 'Grafana Mimir hash rings' page (#12924)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/references/architecture/hash-ring/index.md

# Grafana Mimir hash rings

Hash rings are a distributed [consistent hashing scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistent_hashing) that Grafana Mimir uses for sharding, replication, and service discovery.

The following Mimir features are built on top of hash rings:

- **Service discovery**: Instances can discover each other by looking up which peers are registered in the ring.

> - **Health check**: Instances periodically send a heartbeat to the ring to signal that they are alive. An instance is considered unhealthy if it misses heartbeats for a configured period.

Reviewer: 'alive' sounds a little weird to me. Could we say 'healthy' instead?

The data or workload to be sharded is hashed using a function that returns a 32-bit unsigned integer, called a token.
The instance that owns that token handles the data.

Hash rings provide **consistent hashing**.
When an instance joins or leaves the ring, only a small, bounded portion of data moves.
On average, only `n/m` tokens move, where `n` is the total number of tokens (32-bit unsigned integer) and `m` is the number of instances that are registered in the ring.

## How series sharding works

The most important hash ring in Grafana Mimir is the one used to shard series.
The implementation details depend on the configured architecture.

### How series sharding works in ingest storage architecture

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This guidance applies to ingest storage architecture. For more information about the supported architectures in Grafana Mimir, refer to [Grafana Mimir architecture](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/get-started/about-grafana-mimir-architecture/).
{{< /admonition >}}

In the ingest storage architecture, [distributors](../components/distributor/) shard incoming series across Kafka partitions.

> Each series is assigned to a single Kafka partition and is not replicated across multiple partitions, because Kafka itself provides replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each series is assigned to a single Kafka partition. Replication is handled by Kafka.

```

When a distributor receives a write request containing series data:

1.	It hashes each series using the `fnv32a` hashing function.
2.	It looks up the resulting token in the partitions ring to determine the Kafka partition for that series.
3.	It writes the series to the matching Kafka partition.

A write request is considered successful when all series in the request are successfully committed to Kafka.

#### Read path

The ingesters ring is the source of truth for all ingesters currently running in the Grafana Mimir cluster and is used for service discovery.
Each ingester registers itself in the ring and periodically updates its heartbeat.

[Queriers](../components/querier/) watch the ingesters ring to identify alive ingesters and their IP addresses. When a querier receives a query:

1.	It looks up the partitions ring to find which partitions contain the relevant data.
2.	It looks up the ingesters ring to find which ingesters own those partitions.
3.	It fetches the matching series by contacting the ingesters that own the partitions.

In the ingest storage architecture, consistency is guaranteed with quorum 1.

> This means each partition needs to be queried only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each partition needs to be queried only once.
```

If multiple ingesters own the same partition, the querier fetches data from only one of the alive ingesters for that partition.

#### Partitions ring lifecycle

A partition in the ring can be in one of the following states:

- `Pending` – no writes or reads are allowed.
- `Active` – the partition is in read-write mode.
- `Inactive` – the partition is in read-only mode.

Partitions are not live components and cannot register themselves in the ring.
Their lifecycle is managed by ingesters.
Each ingester manages the lifecycle of the partition it owns.

When ingesters are scaled out, new partitions are added to the ring.

> When ingesters are scaled in, their partitions are removed from the ring through a decommissioning procedure described below.

Reviewer: Can we link to the decommissioning procedure section here?

Partition and ingester downscaling are managed by Grafana's [Kubernetes Rollout Operator](https://github.com/grafana/rollout-operator).

When an ingester is marked for termination due to a downscaling event, the Rollout Operator invokes the "prepare delayed downscale endpoint" API exposed by the ingester.
This API switches the partition from `Active` to `Inactive`.

When a partition is `Inactive`, distributors can no longer write to it, but queriers must still read from it.
The partition remains in this state until it is safe to stop querying the ingester — specifically, when the data has become available for querying from long-term object storage.

Once the grace period passes, the Rollout Operator invokes a second API exposed by the ingester, the "prepare shutdown endpoint".
This API removes the ingester as a partition owner from the ring.
If the partition has no remaining owners, it is then removed from the ring entirely.

Finally, the Rollout Operator terminates the ingester pod, completing the safe downscaling procedure.

[//]: # "Diagram source at https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1bHp8_zcoWCYoNU2AhO2lSagQyuIrghkCncViSqn14cU/edit"

> ![Partitions lifecycle - How it works when an ingester stop](partitions-lifecycle-ingesters-stop.png)

Reviewer: Looks like the file name for the image is singular, partitions-lifecycle-ingester-stop.png.

- Service discovery: Instances can discover each other by looking up which peers are registered in the ring.
- Health check: Instances periodically send a heartbeat to the ring to signal that they are healthy. An instance is considered unhealthy if it misses heartbeats for a configured period.
- Zone-aware replication: Optionally replicate data across failure domains for high availability. For more information, refer to [Configure zone-aware replication](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/configure/configure-zone-aware-replication/).
- Shuffle sharding: Optionally limit the blast radius of failures in a multi-tenant cluster by isolating tenants. For more information, refer to [Configure shuffle sharding](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/configure/configure-shuffle-sharding/).

## How the hash ring is used for sharding

The primary use of hash rings in Mimir is sharding data, for example, time series, and workloads, for example, compaction jobs, in a consistent way, without a central coordinator or single point of failure.

Each of the following Mimir components joins its own dedicated hash ring for sharding:

> - [Ingesters](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/ingester/) – shard and replicate series.
> - [Compactors](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/compactor/) – shard compaction jobs.
> - [Store-gateways](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/store-gateway/) – shard blocks to query from long-term storage.
> - [(Optional) Rulers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/ruler/) – shard rule groups to evaluate.
> - [(Optional) Alertmanagers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/alertmanager/) – shard tenants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Ingesters](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/ingester/): Shard and replicate series.
- [Compactors](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/compactor/): Shard compaction jobs.
- [Store-gateways](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/store-gateway/): Shard blocks to query from long-term storage.
- [(Optional) Rulers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/ruler/): Shard rule groups to evaluate.
- [(Optional) Alertmanagers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/alertmanager/): Shard tenants.
```

A write request is considered successful when all series in the request are successfully committed to Kafka.

#### Read path

The ingesters ring is the source of truth for all ingesters currently running in the Grafana Mimir cluster and is used for service discovery.
Each ingester registers itself in the ring and periodically updates its heartbeat.

[Queriers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/querier/) watch the ingesters ring to identify healthy ingesters and their IP addresses. When a querier receives a query:

1. It looks up the partitions ring to find which partitions contain the relevant data.
2. It looks up the ingesters ring to find which ingesters own those partitions.
3. It fetches the matching series by contacting the ingesters that own the partitions.

In ingest storage architecture, consistency is guaranteed with a quorum of 1.
Each partition needs to be queried only once.
If multiple ingesters own the same partition, the querier fetches data from only one of the healthy ingesters for that partition.

#### Partitions ring lifecycle

A partition in the ring can be in one of the following states:

> - `Pending` – no writes or reads are allowed.
> - `Active` – the partition is in read-write mode.
> - `Inactive` – the partition is in read-only mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Pending`: No writes or reads are allowed.
- `Active`: The partition is in read-write mode.
- `Inactive`: The partition is in read-only mode.
```

Reviewer: Are these states literals? If not, we should remove the backticks.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This guidance applies to classic architecture. For more information about the supported architectures in Grafana Mimir, refer to [Grafana Mimir architecture](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/get-started/about-grafana-mimir-architecture/).
{{< /admonition >}}

In classic architecture, [distributors](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/distributor/) shard and replicate the incoming series among [ingesters](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/ingester/).

Each ingester joins the ingesters hash ring and owns a subset of token ranges.
When a distributor receives a write request containing series data, it hashes each series using the `fnv32a` hashing function.
It then looks up the resulting token in the ingesters hash ring to find the authoritative owner and replicates the series to the next `RF - 1` ingesters in the ring (where `RF` is the replication factor, `3` by default).
Then the distributor writes the series to the `RF` ingesters owning the series itself.

To illustrate, consider four ingesters and a token space from `0` to `9`:

> - Ingester #1 is registered in the ring with the token `2`
> - Ingester #2 is registered in the ring with the token `4`
> - Ingester #3 is registered in the ring with the token `6`
> - Ingester #4 is registered in the ring with the token `9`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ingester #1 is registered in the ring with the token `2`.
- Ingester #2 is registered in the ring with the token `4`.
- Ingester #3 is registered in the ring with the token `6`.
- Ingester #4 is registered in the ring with the token `9`.
```

In the example that follows, the series are replicated to the instances of `Ingester #3` and `Ingester #4`.

![Hash ring with replication](classic-hash-ring-with-replication.png)

[//]: # "Diagram source at https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1bHp8_zcoWCYoNU2AhO2lSagQyuIrghkCncViSqn14cU/edit"

## How the hash ring is used for service discovery

Grafana Mimir also uses the ring for built-in service discovery.
Since instances register themselves in their ring and periodically send heartbeats, it's convenient to use the hash ring for internal service discovery as well.

When the hash ring is used exclusively for service discovery, rather than sharding, instances don't register tokens in the ring.
Instead, they only register their presence and periodically update a heartbeat timestamp.
When other instances need to find the healthy instances of a given component, they look up the ring to find the instances that have successfully updated the heartbeat timestamp in the ring.

The Grafana Mimir components using the ring for service discovery or coordination are:

> - [Distributors](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/distributor/) – enforce global rate limits as local limits by dividing the global limit by the number of healthy distributor instances.
> - [Query-schedulers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/query-scheduler/) – allow query-frontends and queriers to discover available schedulers.
> - [(Optional) Overrides-exporters](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/overrides-exporter/) – self-elect a leader among replicas to export high-cardinality metrics. No strict leader election is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Distributors](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/distributor/): Enforce global rate limits as local limits by dividing the global limit by the number of healthy distributor instances.
- [Query-schedulers](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/query-scheduler/): Allow query-frontends and queriers to discover available schedulers.
- [(Optional) Overrides-exporters](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/references/architecture/components/overrides-exporter/): Self-elect a leader among replicas to export high-cardinality metrics. No strict leader election is required.
```

![Hash ring without replication](classic-hash-ring-without-replication.png)

By default, Grafana Mimir replicates each series to three ingesters.
After finding the authoritative owner of the series, the distributor continues to walk the ring clockwise to find the remaining two instances where the series should be replicated.
In the example that follows, the series are replicated to the instances of `Ingester #3` and `Ingester #4`.

![Hash ring with replication](classic-hash-ring-with-replication.png)

[//]: # "Diagram source at https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1bHp8_zcoWCYoNU2AhO2lSagQyuIrghkCncViSqn14cU/edit"

## How the hash ring is used for service discovery

Grafana Mimir also uses the ring for built-in service discovery.
Since instances register themselves in their ring and periodically send heartbeats, it becomes very convenient using the hash ring for internal service discovery as well.

When the hash ring is used exclusively for service discovery (not sharding), instances do **not** register tokens in the ring.
Instead, they only register their presence and periodically update a heartbeat timestamp.

> When other instances need to find the alive instances of a given component, they lookup the ring to find the instances that have successfully updated the heartbeat the ring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When other instances need to find the alive instances of a given component, they look up the ring to find the instances that have successfully updated the heartbeat the ring.
```
